---
layout: post
title:  "XDC 2018 Report"
date:   2018-10-05
categories: report
published: true
---

X.Org Developer's Conference (XDC) is the summit meeting for people that work
with graphics in all the world to meet each other for three days. There you
will  find people working with compositors, direct rendering management (DRM),
graphics applications, and so forth; all these people at the same place create
a unique learning opportunity. Finally, you can feel the community spirit in
every table, talk, and corner.

The XDC has many exciting talks, social events, and space for discussion with
developers. All of this enabled thanks to the organization team, which did a
great job by organizing the conference; they selected a great university that
had a perfect structure for hosting the event.  They also included social
events that introduced some background about the history of the La Coruna; In
my case, I enjoyed to learn a bit of the local history.  About the food, the
conference provided coffee breaks and lunch during all the days, all of them
great!

# About the community

In my case, I put as much effort as possible to learn from people. In the first
day, I had a great conversation with Daniel Stone, Roman Gilg, Drew DeVault,
Guido Günther and other about compositors. In particular, Daniel Stone
explained a lot of details about Weston and Wayland; he also taught me how to
test Weston on top of VKMS, and how to see logs. Additionally, Daniel gave me
an excellent idea: add writeback to VKMS to provide visual output and other
features. In the same day, Daniel explained me many things about the community
organization and his work to maintain the Gitlab instance for the Freedesktop;
I really enjoyed every second of our conversation.

Additionally, I met a group of Sway developers during lunch. After a small
chat, for some reason they took their laptops and started to play with Sway; I
got really impressed with their work and enthusiasm. Then, I decided that I
wanted to learn how to contribute with Sway for two reasons: I  want to learn
more about graphics in the user space (compositors), and I want to use a new
desktop environment. Afterwards, I started asking Drew to teach me how to
compile and use Sway. He was really kind, he showed me many things about
compositor then pointed me directions to better get into this world.

On the second day, I was obsessed about writeback, and I tried to talk with
Brian Starkey; he is the original author of the patch that added writeback to
DRM. We spoke for one hour, Bryan explained me so many details about writeback
and gave me some ideas on how I could implement it on VKMS. In the end, he also
sent me an email with diagrams that he made on-the-fly and some extra
explanation about the subject. I am happy that I had the opportunity to learn
so many things from him. In the same day, I also got a chance to talk to
Arkadiusz Hiler about some of the patches that I sent to IGT, and I also made
lots of questions about IGT. He explained with details, how I could read the
intel CI report and other related stuff. I hope that after his explanations I
can improve my patches and also send much more for IGT.

On the third day, Haneen and I worked together to learn as much as we could by
asking many things to Daniel Vetter. We used the opportunity to clarify many of
our questions, and also discuss some patches we sent. At the end of our
conversation, I applied to become co-mentor in the Outreachy; I hope that I can
help bringing new people to become part of this fantastic community.

 This is just a brief summary of XDC, I took every single opportunity that I
had to talk to people and learned something new.

# I finally met Haneen, Daniel Vetter, Sean Paul, Martin Peres, and Arkadiusz Hiler


One exciting thing about working remotely it is the fact that you talk with
many people without really know them in person. In particular, I worked with
Haneen for such a long time, but I have never seen her; however, in the XDC I
finally met her! It was really nice to talk to her, both of us were together
most of the time trying to understand as much as we could; as a result, we
always helped each other in the event to better understand the concepts that
someone would explained us.

I also met Daniel Vetter, and Sean Paul, both of them were our mentors during
summer. I really enjoyed to talk with them and put a face on the nickname.
Additionally, I met Martin Peres, thanks to him I created this website to keep
reporting my work and also thanks to him I could enjoy XDC.

Finally, I met Hiler from Intel. He provided many feedback on the patches I
sent IGT; he also helped a lot in the IRC channel. I really liked to meet him
in person.

# Feedbacks

During the event, Haneen and I received so many feedback on how we could
improve the VKMS that we decided to do a workshop in the last day. The workshop
was great, a lot of people joined, and we took note of new ideas.  From the
conversation, we emerged the following list of tasks:

* [TODO LIST](https://dri.freedesktop.org/docs/drm/gpu/vkms.html#vkms)

Now that I learned a lot and collected so many feedback, I will work on the
following steps:

1. Implement writeback support
2. Implement configfs system
3. Mentor a newcomer in the outreachy

